Title: Installing a Window Manager: i3wm edition
Date: 2024-11-17T19:50:08
Category: NixOS

Time to turn this server into a workstation. I'm planning on (finally) making the switch to wayland soon, but for now I'm going to get my old favourite i3wm up and running.

```bash
cd ~/code/nix/nix-config
git checkout -b i3wm
```

Using the [wiki page for i3](https://nixos.wiki/wiki/I3):

<!-- TODO Link to commit 692448f -->

I've just followed the wiki exactly, even though I'm not that into i3gaps. I'll get it working first, then I can get it right.

```bash
sudo nixos-rebuild switch --flake .
reboot
```

Reboot the laptop, and I get a graphical login screen. And I can log in :)

[According to the wiki](https://nixos.wiki/wiki/I3#I3-gaps_fork), I also need to set the global i3 package to i3-gaps to use i3-gaps.

<!-- TODO Link to commit 04a1ed3 -->

OK, time to get i3wm working just so. First thing to fix is the keybindings, which inexplicably suffer from an off-by-one error (`jkl;` instead of `hjkl`).

<!-- TODO Link to commit 5be5a12 -->

🥴 There are some new things here. First of all, I'm including `config` and `lib` in the "inputs" (?) here because I'm going to need them for this change.

Then I'm declaring a variable called `modifier` that will only exist for the scope of this configuration block (the bit between the `{ }`s). This is in case I change `Modifier = Mod4` on line 46 <!-- TODO Add permalink to line --> to something else I only have to change it in the one place.

Finally, I'm using `mkOptionDefault` to say "I don't want to replace ALL the default keybindings", just add/replace these ones.

Unfortunately, the `focus left` keybind (which is sensible) overwrites the `split h` keybind for splitting horizontally. I use `o`, as in "I'm from London and I want an Orizontal split!"

<!-- TODO Link to commit 42595bd -->

Of course, I want the "move windows around" keys to be the same as the "focus windows around" keys:

<!-- TODO Link to commit 7099837 -->

# References

- [i3 - NixOS Wiki](https://nixos.wiki/wiki/I3)
