Title: How to use my configuration of i3
Date: 2025-04-18T22:41:20
Category: Cheatsheet

i3 is a [tiling window manager](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tiling_window_manager) with vim-like modes. It supports a mouse, but interactions (like opening programs, moving windows around) are done using the keyboard using vim-like keybinds.

Most interactions with i3wm involve holding down a [modifier key](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modifier_key) and pressing some other button. My configuration uses the `Mod4` key, which is known as the [Meta](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Meta_key) in [KDE](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/KDE), the [Super](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Super_key_(keyboard_button)) key in [GNOME](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GNOME), the [Windows key](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Windows_key) on Windows, the [Command key](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Command_key) on Macs, and probably other things elsewhere. It's the third key from the left on the bottom row of my keyboard. Beside the `Alt` key.

So `Mod4 + Enter` means "hold down the meta key and press Enter".

## Most important thing first

If you're following along at home, it's easiest to practice with a bunch of open windows. Easiest way to do that is to open a bunch of terminals.

<!-- TODO Turn this into a description list somehow -->
To open a terminal:
    `Mod4 + Enter`

## Moving 

### Moving the focus

"Moving focus" means changing which window you are interacting with (the equivalent of clicking on it with the mouse). This is done by moving left, right, up, or down from whatever window currently has focus. This'll wrap as well, so if you move right of the right-most window then you'll focus on whatever is furthest left.

Move focus left
    `Mod4 + h`

Move focus down
    `Mod4 + j`

Move focus up
    `Mod4 + k`

Move focus right
    `Mod4 + l`

### Moving windows around

The same keys are used to move windows around as well, just add some `Shift`.

Move focussed window left
    `Mod4 + Shift + h`

Move focussed window down
    `Mod4 + Shift + j`

Move focussed window up
    `Mod4 + Shift + k`

Move focussed window right
    `Mod4 + Shift + l`

### Resizing windows

Resizing windows is the same concept, but involves switching to one of those modes I mentioned before.

Switch to resize mode:
    `Mod4 + r`

The word `resize` will appear in the i3bar at the top-left.

Get out of resize mode:
    `Mod4 + r`
    `Escape`

To resize windows, go into resize mode first and use the following keys:

To shrink the current window width a little: 
    `←`

To shrink the current window width a lot: 
    `h`

To grow the current window height a little:  (Note, this seems backwards)
    `↓`

To grow the current window height a lot:  (Note, this seems backwards)
    `j`

To shrink the current window height a little:  (Note, this seems backwards)
    `↑`

To shrink the current window height a lot:  (Note, this seems backwards)
    `k`

To grow the current window width a little: 
    `→`

To grow the current window width a lot: 
    `l`

### Messing about with the window layout

i3 will default to opening new windows by splitting horizontally (opening a new window to the right of the old one and distributing the space evenly between them). You can switch between `splith` (split horizontally) and `splitv` (splitting vertically, new windows open below the current one).

`splith` mode:
    `Mod4 + o`

`splitv` mode:
    `Mod4 + v`

Windows are grouped into [containers](https://i3wm.org/docs/userguide.html#_the_tree_consists_of_containers), and there are different layouts you can use for each container.

The first one is `stacking` which I never use. The focussed window fills most of the container, and the other windows in the container only show their window decoration (title bar at the top).

Switch to stacking layout:
    `Mod4 + s`

I used the tabbed layout a bit more; it's almost the same as stacking except the window decorators are collected in a single line so your focussed window has a bit more vertical room

Switch to tabbed layout:
    `Mod4 + w`

To get back to the regular defautl everything is visible mode:
    `Mod4 + e`

`Mod4 + e` also toggles between vertical and horizontal stacking.

Sometimes I want a thing to be fullscreen. This is also a toggle, so use it to switch between fullscreen and not fullscreen.
    `Mod4 + f`

Sometimes you don't want a window to be tiled, but rather float like in a traditional desktop. Things like a calculator or a Zoom window.

To (toggle) a window to float or not:
    `Mod4 + Shift + Space`

To switch focus between the floating windows and the tiled windows:
    `Mod4 + Space`

This lets you control floating windows properly using the keyboard. You can resize a floating window, and the "Moving windows around commands (`Mod4 + Shift + {h,j,k,l,←,↓,↑,→}`) move the window around on the screen a few pixels. I wonder if I can configure it to move different amounts with the arrow keys like my resize commands?

You can "pin" a floating window so that it appears on **all** workspaces, which is nice for watching a video while you are doing other things.

Pin a floating window to all workspaces:
    `Mod4 + Shift + p`

### Moving between workspaces

There are ten workspaces by default in i3, think of them like virtual desktops. Switch to them using the number keys:

Switch to workspace 1:
    `Mod4 + 1`

Switch to workspace 2:
    `Mod4 + 2`

etc.

To move the current focused window to workspace 4:
    `Mod4 + shift + 4`

There's also the scratchpad which I never use (but maybe I should?).

Moving a window to the scratchpad sort of 
## Launching programs and other Rofi-related things

Opening terminals again for completeness.
    `Mod4 + Enter`

I use rofi as my application launcher, it also gets opened in different modes.

The first mode is "run something in my `$PATH`. This gives me access to anything in my `bin` directory, and now that I come to write that down I realise that I only use it for launching web browsers. If I have custom launchers, why don't I just create a desktop file for them?

Anyway, to launch rofi in `$PATH` mode:
    `Mod4 + d`

To launch rofi in "let me pick between all my .desktop files" mode (think launcher menu items):
    `Mod4 + Shift + d`

Rofi has a `pass` interface that I use many many times a day.
    `Mod4 + p`

Once you've chosen the password item you want, rofi will scan the password file for "fields" and let you choose between them:

<!-- TODO insert image 17-5-i3wm_pass_choose_field.png -->

I also have a smiley picker in rofi which copies whichever smiley you choose to the clipboard.

To open rofi in smiley mode:
    `Mod4 + shift + s`

## Notifications

Woah, these keybindings **don't** use the Mod4 key.

To reshow old notifications (you can press this multiple times to work through the list):
    `Control + grave` (the backtick key)

To close the most recent notification:
    `Control + space`

To close all visible notifications:
    `Control + Shift + Space`

# References

- [i3 — i3: improved tiling X11 window manager](https://i3wm.org/)
- [Modifier key - Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modifier_key)
- [Meta key - Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Meta_key)
- [KDE - Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/KDE)
- [Super key (keyboard button) - Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Super_key_(keyboard_button))
- [GNOME - Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GNOME)
- [Windows key - Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Windows_key)
- [Command key - Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Command_key)

