Title: vims
Date: 2025-04-15T22:30:20
Category: NixOS

Font sorted! Where was I?

Getting rid of that warning. It looks like I have two options:

1. Install `web-devicons`
2. Install `mini`
    - Include the `icons` module
    - Include the `mockDevIcons` module

I'd never heard of [mini](https://github.com/echasnovski/mini.nvim) before, but it looks like a lovely way to maintain consistency. So I'm going to go for that to begin with.

It's a bit of a kitchen sink, so I'm not sure where to put it. Icons are a style thing, so it's time to expand the style config a bit.

First split it into it's own directory:

<!-- TODO Link to commit 001557c -->

Next, enable the mini "meta" plugin.

<!-- TODO Link to commit ff0e304 -->

Then enable the icons plugin

<!-- TODO Link to commit bf8c108 -->

Finally, turn on the devicons mock so that mini.icons "pretends" to be devicons for any plugins that expect that and don't support mini.icons.

<!-- TODO Link to commit 8b203aa -->

And the warning is gone 🥳. And I'm going to have pretty icons when I configure Telescope.

## Telescope

Oh yeah! Telescope, that's what I was doing.

My most common usage for telescope is to find and open files:

<!-- TODO Link to commit ac47782 -->

Now if I run `Telescope find_files` in neovim I get this lovely view, and I can type to find the file I want. It's way faster than navigating a tree.

<!-- TODO Insert image 36-telescope_find_files.png -->

Double-press escape to get out of Telescope.

I have a regular key (`<leader> ff`) combination to bring up the `find_files` ui, so time to add that.

Oh, wait. I haven't configured my leader keys yet.

Leader keys are so you can configure lots of key combinations and shortcuts without worrying about clashing with any regular vim conbinations. The idea is that you have a key that preceeds any of your custom bindings, almost like you're putting vim into another mode (my-stuff-mode).

There's two leader keys; `<Leader>` and `<LocalLeader>`. The second one is local to a buffer, and I haven't yet found an excuse to use it.

The trick is to find a key that isn't useful for anything else. I used to use the `,` key, but `,` is incredibly useful for repeating things backwards (it's the opposite of [the dot key](https://neovim.io/doc/user/repeat.html#_single-repeats)).

The default key is `\`, which is _kind of_ OK on a US keyboard like mine, but if I need to use a UK keyboard as well it'll break my brain.

The `<space>` key does basically **nothing** though. It does the same as the `l` key, which is "move right one character. It's central, pressed by the strongest fingers on my hands, and accessible when I'm in the home position. It's _perfect_.

<!-- TODO Link to commit 1ef15a9 -->

(You don't _have_ to use a leader key by the way, I just like to make sure I don't step on any default bindings).

Now I can add a key combination to launch the find files fuzzy finder. I'm trying to use mnemonics, so `ff` is `find files`.

<!-- TODO Link to commit 408e030 -->

Vim doesn't do live-reloads by the way so I'm quitting and re-entering vim to get these changes to appear.

According to [telescope's README](https://github.com/nvim-telescope/telescope.nvim?tab=readme-ov-file#suggested-dependencies), it's recommended to install fzf-native or something as well.

<!-- TODO Link to commit 8d87c30 -->

Easy. Lets have a look at `checkhealth telescope` in vim and see if I need to do anything else.

There are three warnings/errors:

1. `nvim-treesitter` is not found (I will deal with this later)
2 .`rg` is not found.
3. `fd` is not found,

I've never used [fd](https://github.com/sharkdp/fd) before but it sounds kinda lovely.

[RipGrep (rg)](https://github.com/BurntSushi/ripgrep) is wonderful and I've missed it terribly. Time to get ripgrep on my system.

Ripgrep:

<!-- TODO Link to commit 91ad296 -->

Treat RipGrep like normal grep by running the `rg` command and providing a pattern. It prints filenames and line numbers by default, searchers recursively by default as well 😍, respects `.gitignore` as well. It **doesn't** follow symlinks by default which is a bit of a pain on NixOS.

And fd:

<!-- TODO Link to commit eff2558 -->

That looks really interesting and I need to play with it some more.

I can fix RipGrep ignoring symlinks with an alias though:

<!-- TODO Link to commit 0dc6687 -->

Back to telescope. What else can I search?

Search (grep) for text. Very very useful. The extension is already enabled somehow so I just need to add `<leader>fg` to call it.

<!-- TODO Link to commit 94d2404 -->

Normally I use `/` to search the current buffer, which makes sense because it's the obvious default way to search a vim buffer and has been for probably 30 years. But telescope gives me fuzzy finding and fuzzy finding might be nice in the current buffer.

<!-- TODO Link to commit 91dbabb -->

I'm adding `options.desc` to each binding, which makes them show up as explanatory text in which-key. They're a bit unsystematic though, so maybe I should try to make the mnemonics a bit more obvious.

<!-- TODO Link to commit c173b6e -->

Hmm, I don't _love_ them, but it'll do for now.

Having a fuzzy buffer picker is suprisingly handy:

<!-- TODO Link to commit 8cf7bcc -->

Maybe I'd like to search for keymaps as well? I've never used this but hopefully I can start.

<!-- TODO Link to commit 0924a23 -->

And fuzzy-searching vim help documents might be really useful. Again, not something I've used before but hopefully I can train myself to start.

<!-- TODO Link to commit efcb328 -->

This one I've used a bunch when I remember it, but I need more practice. `*` searches the current buffer for the word under the cursor, this will search the current directory (and children) for the same.

<!-- TODO Link to commit ae240ec -->

Another not-used-enough vim tools is the ShaDa ("shared data") file, including a list of recently opened files (files that have marks stored). You can get to it with `:oldfiles` (or just `:o`), but telescope has an extension for it.

<!-- TODO Link to commit 9f6efe8 -->

Searching through available commands will be great until I figure out bindings for them:

<!-- TODO Link to commit b6c075e -->

And searching through the command history as well. I might need to adjust the timeouts on this if it's too slow (because I've got two very similar bindings: `f:` and `f:h`, so when I type `f:` I need to wait for neovim to decide I'm not going to type an `h`).

<!-- TODO Link to commit f800f30 -->

Searching my search history is a lot better than typing `/` and then smashing the up arrow key a hundred times.

<!-- TODO Link to commit 488b5d5 -->

Ooh, this is a really interesting one. Search through the list of vim marks. That'll make a nice change to pressing `<Ctrl>+o` and `<Ctrl>+i` n times.

<!-- TODO Link to commit dc81c2e -->

There are a fair number of other telescope things (the quickfix one might be good once I get better at using the quickfix list) but I think I'm good for now.

## Completion

Completion is done via [nvim-cmp](https://github.com/hrsh7th/nvim-cmp), it shows a nice dropdown of possible completions, has **lots** of sources for the engine and the bindings are very configurable. It's just the standard at the moment.

Completion configuration is going in a directory called `completion` in `plugins`.

<!-- TODO Link to commit 5e49d59 -->

nvim-cmp needs "sources" turned on, places to look at for potential completion information. The basic one is strings inside the current vim buffer:

<!-- TODO Link to commit a33d820 -->

<!-- TODO Insert image 36-cmp_buffer_sources.png -->

The `path` source is great; it's looking at the local filesystem relative to the working directory. It does mean that you're more encouraged to open vim at the top-level of the project directory, but telescope makes opening files inside of neovim really easy, so it's not a hardship.

`cmp` is working nicely, but I don't think I want the completion to popup after a single character, there's too many false positives. Fortunately, that's configurable - only show me completions if 3 or more characters match:

<!-- TODO Link to commit 2104668 -->

## An interlude

I noticed that `:Telescope man_pages` wasn't showing any results. A quick look at the [source](https://github.com/nvim-telescope/telescope.nvim/blob/a4ed82509cecc56df1c7138920a1aeaf246c0ac5/lua/telescope/builtin/__internal.lua#L820) shows that it's using `apropos` internally to look up man pages.

Do I have `apropos` installed?

```bash
command -v apropos
```

```
/etc/profiles/per-user/stooj/bin/apropos
```

Yes, yes I do.

Does it work?

```
[stooj@drummer:~]$ apropos command
command: nothing appropriate.

[stooj@drummer:~]$ apropos edit
edit: nothing appropriate.

[stooj@drummer:~]$ apropos vim
vim: nothing appropriate.

[stooj@drummer:~]$ apropos which
which: nothing appropriate.
```

No. No it does not.

A quick search of the NixOs options for [apropos](https://search.nixos.org/options?channel=24.11&from=0&size=50&sort=relevance&type=packages&query=apropos) throws up a very hopeful option that is disabled by default: `documentation.man.generateCaches`.

<!-- TODO Link to commit d202733 -->

<!-- TODO Insert image 36-telescope_man_pages_working.png -->

Noice.

Since I got it working, it deserves it's very own keymap. The default "look this word up in a man page" bind in vim is `<Shift>k`, so `<leader><Shift>k` seems appropriate.

<!-- TODO Link to commit 0a3fa5a -->

## Back to cmp

I've been reading through the nixvim documentation and I _think_ I'm enabling these sources incorrectly.

No, I'm doing it correctly. To turn on a source, there's `programs.nixvim.plugins.cmp-path.enable = true` etc. But `programs.nixvim.plugins.cmp` has an `autoEnableSources` option which defaults to `true`. This option will auto-enable anything in the `sources` list that it recognises.

Cmp isn't very useful until it has some keybinds associated with it. There are defaults but the [README](https://github.com/hrsh7th/nvim-cmp) says "don't use the defaults".

First make room for the new configuration which is going to be inside `cmp.settings`:

<!-- TODO Link to commit 902e43e -->

I've gotten used to `<C-n>` (control + n) and `<C-p>` until now, but I'm going to rethink these bindings.

Maybe `<C-j>` and `<C-k>`?

<!-- TODO Link to commit f4b2287 -->

And that's all I need just now I think - I can scroll with the `j` and `k` keys when holding control, then keep typing when I pick the right one. Do I need `abort`? I can add it later if I do.

### Some more general configuration

I've thought of some other things that I'd like to have, starting with this cool autocommand:

<!-- TODO Link to commit 7e60640 -->

Theoretically it should put the cursor back to the last position I was at when I re-open a file, but not for git commit message buffers. We'll see; there are some other suggestions on this [reddit post](https://www.reddit.com/r/neovim/comments/1052d98/how_to_save_last_position_in_files/?rdt=57055).

Another wonderful thing is making vim remember undo history between sessions:

<!-- TODO Link to commit 2898e22 -->

But! There are some files that **absolutely** must not be included in the undo history because they are super secret. Or I just don't care.

<!-- TODO Link to commit 1b352a6 -->

So far, I'm ignoring:

1. Git commit messages.
2. password-store passwords
3. Anything in `/tmp` - this includes decrypted sops files, but it makes sense to exclude everything else there as well. They are temporary after all.

Huh, it turns out that autoCmd has a `desc` attribute too, so I can get rid of the comment for the lastplace trick. Which isn't working anyway, my cursor on a git commit buffer was way down on line 3 the last time I commited. What are the options...

<!-- TODO insert drumming fingers gif -->

Huh. There's a plugin called [lastplace](https://nix-community.github.io/nixvim/24.11/plugins/lastplace.html) and it's available in nixvim and it looks like the defaults do exactly what I want (ignoring git commit and rebase messages).

<!-- TODO Link to commit 0272ec8 -->

Cool, that works.

Because I'm using a tiling window manager (i3), the size of my nvim UI changes quite frequently as I open and close other (not nvim) windows below or to the right of nvim. This is fine if I only have one visible buffer/window on the screen, but if I have more than one then they tend to get all squashed up and a bit unusable. This autocommand resizes and redistributes windows fairly when nvim changes dimensions.

<!-- TODO Link to commit 39e1ad5 -->

Splits are opened above and to the left by default, which makes them the opposite of where i3 would put a window. This will make new splits appear below, or to the right.

<!-- TODO Link to commit c3cb52e -->

Right, that's a few more QOL improvements. What's next?

## Snippets

[mini.nvim](https://github.com/echasnovski/mini.nvim) apparently has a [snippet engine](https://github.com/echasnovski/mini.nvim/blob/main/readmes/mini-snippets.md) as well that's probably worth exploring, but I've already written a few luaSnips and kinda like them so... sunken cost or whatever.

<!-- TODO Link to commit b3fc5c2 -->

How to manage snippets though? Probably using `home.file` and putting them in the right directory. This'll need refactored in the future, but it'll do for now.

I'll make a test snippet first to check that everything is working.

<!-- TODO Link to commit ad13bd3 -->

That's a bigger change, here's what's happening:

1. `home.file` manages a file at any old place in the home directory.
    - In this case I'm saying:
        - "create a file (actually a symlink) called `markdown.lua` in the `~/.config/nvim/snippets` directory"
        - point it to wherever `/home/stooj/code/nix-config/home/stooj/neovim/files/snippets/markdown.lua` ends up.
2. That file contains:
   ```lua
   return {
   	s("trig", t("loaded!!"))
   }
   ```
3. Configure luasnip to load (from lua files) all the snippets in `~/.config/nvim/snippets`

And if I run `:LuaSnipListAvailable` in neovim, I get:

```
{
  all = {},
  markdown = { {
      description = { "trig" },
      name = "trig",
      regTrig = false,
      trigger = "trig",
      wordTrig = true
    } }
}
```

That seems promising. Next I want to include it as one of the cmp sources:

<!-- TODO Link to commit d75ab3d -->

And I need to tell cmp how to interact with luasnip to see inside snippets. This is straight out of the [man page](https://nix-community.github.io/nixvim/24.11/plugins/cmp/settings/snippet.html?highlight=plugins.cmp.settings.snippet#pluginscmpsettingssnippetexpand)

<!-- TODO Link to commit 3705465 -->

<!-- TODO Insert image 36-cmp_luasnip_expanded.png -->

And I need a way to _confirm_ that yes, I want to expand the currently selected thing in the cmp window. If I'm using `j` and `k` for up and down, it makes sense (in my brain) to use `l` to select a thing.

<!-- TODO Link to commit 22b57ed -->

The `{ select = true }` bit is "just pick the first one if I haven't explicity picked one.

<!-- TODO Insert image 36-cmp_luasnip_confirmed.png -->

Lovely!

While I'm here, I should add a "argh, get me out of here" binding as well. This'll close the cmp window and hopefully put things back to the way they were before.

<!-- TODO Link to commit 8954720 -->

Now that snippets are all set up with cmp, it's time to write a useful snippet. Start with something very simple:

<!-- TODO Link to commit cdcfa9a -->

Nice! If I type `todogc` and press `<C-l>`, it'll expand to `<!-- TODO Link to commit -->`. It occurs to me that anyone reading this blog isn't going to understand why that's great.

> !Note
> So far I haven't configured some way of linking each commit in each post.
> So I've been adding lots of HTML `TODO` comments
> In the future, I'll do a find and replace on the posts to set them to the correct format.
> The git todos take this form: `<!-- TODO Link to commit cdcfa9a -->`

> !Warning
> Note to self - the above note will possibly get found and replaced. Make sure that note stays the same (maybe only find and replace comments that are at the start of the line?)

Anyway, this snippet uses a single `textNode`, specified by the `t`. Whenever I add this snippet I want to paste in the commit hash (using kitty's hints thing, did I mention how awesome that is?).

First, split the single textNode into two, so I can `insert` another one between them:

<!-- TODO Link to commit d967d2e -->

Then add the insert:

<!-- TODO Link to commit cbaf332 -->

Nice! Now the snippet puts the whole comment in and puts me in insert mode, perfectly placed to paste the git hash.

I also have a `TODO` for images:

<!-- TODO Link to commit ebc2fdb -->

## Treesitter

Treesitter understands your code; it knows a function is a function, an interface is an interface, and a string is a string of characters. A treesitter parser will produce an abstract syntax tree out of the words in your editor. It annotates a blob of text into structured information.

I'm not doing a great job of explaining it.

The treesitter core comes as standard in neovim, but there aren't any parsers installed. For easy parser installation, I need `nvim-treesitter`:

<!-- TODO Link to commit 31cdcf2 -->

That installed _every_ parser by default using nix. To check this, I ran `TSInstallInfo` and saw everything was [✓]ed and marked as installed. That's cool; my old installation method would install these parsers via vim so my first run of the editor would take ages and block and annoy me. This is way better.

To see what the parser is actually doing, run `InspectTree`. I **always** forget this command so I'm writing it down here where I can always look it up again. It even works with markdown!

Let's face it though, treesitter is for prettier highlighting. That's disabled by default, so time to fix that.

<!-- TODO Link to commit 8f19926 -->

Here's a file with highlighting disabled:

<!-- TODO Insert image 36-treesitter_highlighting_disabled.png -->

And here it is again with highlighting _enabled_:

<!-- TODO Insert image 36-treesitter_highlighting_enabled.png -->

It doesn't look hugely different, but the imporant thing is that attribute paths are being treated as a collection of attributes; in the before picture only the _last_ attribute was coloured blue. That doesn't make sense in the context of the language. In the after picture, all attributes are coloured blue because they are... well, all attributes. The functions are now coloured white.

Treesitter also can improve the `=` key for indentation. I'm going to try it by running `TSBufEnable indent` then `gg=G`. (`gg`: go to the top of the file. `=`: reindent until... `G`: the end of the file).

<!-- TODO Insert image 36-treesitter_terrible_indenting.png -->

WOAH, that's not what I wanted! Tabs? Huge huge indents? No thanks, I need to set my standard vim indentation rules first before the treesitter option is useful.

## Back to vim configuration

There are a bunch of rules about how indentation works in vim, it's not just a single number you can set and forget.

First, there is `shiftwidth`:

<!-- TODO Link to commit baefcfe -->

Shiftwidth is used for autoindenting, when vim is indenting or dedenting something, this controls how many spaces to use for each indent step. It's 4 for me.

There there is `tabstop`:

<!-- TODO Link to commit 1739389 -->

Tabstop decides how much space a tab character should visually take up. "If there's a tab in this file, it should _look_ like it takes the same size as 4 spaces.

`softtabstop` is disabled by default, and I'm going to leave it that way. It does something absurd like mixing real tabs and spaces or something. No thanks.

`expandtab` is telling vim to insert spaces when I press the tab key.

<!-- TODO Link to commit 543f610 -->

This is all very well when I am in charge of the kingdom, but I'm often working on other people's code and they have differing ideas about what the tab/indent rules should be. There are a couple of things I can do to respect their wishes.

The first is [EditorConfig](https://editorconfig.org/), which lets you declare an editor-agnostic file with style rules in the root of your project, and vim will read this file and change the settings accordingly. It's not popular enough if you ask me, but it's built-in to nixvim. All this indent stuff is enough to live in it's own file, so I'll move it first.

<!-- TODO Link to commit 2ee0e78 -->

Then enable editorconfig:

<!-- TODO Link to commit 5d20e16 -->

Not enough people use editorconfig though, so there are other methods. Tim Pope has a plugin called [sleuth.vim](https://github.com/tpope/vim-sleuth), which tries to work out what the indentation rules are.

If you open an existing file, it will scan the file and take a best guess at what the existing rules on the file are. If you open a _new_ file, it'll look at other files of the same type in the current and parent directories. It also respects modelines and editorconfig, so yay.

<!-- TODO Link to commit f3072ae -->

Hmm, from my read of the [sleuth docs page](https://github.com/tpope/vim-sleuth/blob/master/doc/sleuth.txt) it is a superset of editorconfig so I don't need it. And looking at the [nixvim docs](https://nix-community.github.io/nixvim/24.11/NeovimOptions/editorconfig/index.html) it's enabled by default so I didn't need to explicitly set it.

So I'm going to turn it off.

<!-- TODO Link to commit d1dbbf8 -->

So is it all working? Well, my nix config uses 2 spaces instead of my default of 4, so if I open one of my nix files then the `shiftwidth` ought to be `2`. I just open up a file and run `set shiftwidth ?` (the `?` means "don't set this, tell me what it already is").

<!-- TODO Insert image 36-vim_sleuth_working.png -->

Nice!

Here's an esoteric option; visual block mode has this weird cornercase with line lengths that is... I'll just show it.

<!-- TODO Insert image 36-visual_block_1.png -->
I've gone into visual block mode with `<C-v>` when my cursor was a the end of the `splitbelow = true` line and moved up (pressed `k` a few times). So far, so kinda good.

If I press `k` one more time though...

<!-- TODO Insert image 36-visual_block_2.png -->

That's not what my brain was expecting. The `virtualedit` option can solve this though, it lets the vim cursor go to anywhere on the screen, even if there isn't text there. I want `virtualedit` mode to be on when in `block` mode.

<!-- TODO Link to commit a52cb69 -->

<!-- TODO Insert image 36-visual_block_3.png -->

Much better.

Time for some search option tweaks. There are going to be a few of them so they deserve their own file:

<!-- TODO Link to commit 17ca983 -->

First option is to ignore case when searching. Easy; this means that if I search for `foo` it will match `foo`, `FOO`, `FoO`, etc.

<!-- TODO Link to commit 2afeb71 -->

Huh, I realised that this makes tab completion in the command line case-insensitive as well. Neat.

But vim has something even _better_. What if sometimes I **want** a case-sensitive search, I can add the `smartcase` option to say "hey, if the search string is mixed-case, make it case-sensitive". Nosearching for `Foo` will only match `Foo`, not `foo`.

<!-- TODO Link to commit 06aa119 -->

When I'm searching and replacing things, I usually want the global flag enabled (match all instances on a line, not just the first one).

<!-- TODO Link to commit b2f2a4e -->

This one is nice; when I do a search and replace, show me a live-preview of that's going to change in a split window.

<!-- TODO Link to commit 0133ad5 -->

<!-- TODO Insert image 36-incsearch.png -->

It's not that useful for such a small file, but it's very handy if some of the replacements are off the screen.

## Language Server Protocol

This is a pretty amazing base for an editor config now, but it's missing language servers. The Language Server Protocol is a JSON protocol that lets editors or IDEs communicate with "language servers"; tools that take source code files and parse them; detecting errors, unused variables, formatting recommendations, etc.

Enabling lsp is easy, but doesn't accomplish much on it's own.

<!-- TODO Link to commit 796f0c1 -->

Time to install an language server, this one is for nix.

<!-- TODO Link to commit d30b3b1 -->

No visual indication that anything happened there, but if I open a nix file with neovim and run `:LspInfo` I get a bunch of information.

To show it working, if I run `:LspStop` first to turn it off and then make a mistake in nix, I can live blissfully unaware of my mistake.

<!-- TODO Insert image 36-lsp_disabled.png -->

Then if I run `:LspStart` to turn the language server link on again, I can't ignore those errors any longer.

<!-- TODO Insert image 36-lsp_enabled.png -->

It'd be nice to get a visual indicatation that the lsp server was doing something, especially if I'm using something really slow like dotnet.

<!-- TODO Link to commit f98a836 -->

<!-- TODO Insert image 36-fidget_enabled.png -->

Nice! LSPs are a source for cmp, so time to turn that on:

<!-- TODO Link to commit 3cf6a12 -->

<!-- TODO Insert image 36-lsp_cmp_enabled.png -->

I _think_ that's working; is it parsing the options from the nixvim source or just repeating what it knows can go inside that code block? Probably the latter. It's good enough for now though.

Another thing I like is for my code to be auto-formatted when I save the buffer.

Time for another plugin, this one is going to take a bit of actual configuration but I'll install it to start with:

<!-- TODO Link to commit f83bfdb -->

Conform is great, but it's also maddening sometimes. If I'm working with a project that doesn't have a consistent style, my one-line patch becomes a massive change because of all the whitespace changes and reindentation that conform does. I want a way to **turn it off** if I need to.

There's a recipe for this in the [project's docs](https://github.com/stevearc/conform.nvim/blob/master/doc/recipes.md#command-to-toggle-format-on-save) that [dc-tec used in their config](https://github.com/dc-tec/nixvim/blob/feeb9b99bb61082edfc2d667b0e5e2aff32d7c54/config/plugins/lsp/conform.nix). Thanks again to `dc-tec` for a lot of inspiration for my config layout.

First, create two new user commands:

1. `FormatDisable`
2. `FormatEnable`.

First command, using nixvim's `userCommands` options 🥰

<!-- TODO Link to commit e72b76a -->

And the opposite to turn it back on again:

<!-- TODO Link to commit d3cc35a -->

Now to hook those variables into conform's `format_on_save` function:

<!-- TODO Link to commit 4d33cdb -->

Hmm. It doesn't seem to be working though. There are two reasons why that might be:

1. I've misconfigured it
2. `nil_ls` isn't returning any formatting information.

I can _force_ conform to run with the following command:

```
:lua require("conform").format({async = true, lsp_format = "true"})
```

I'm turning `lsp_format` on because it's the only formatter I've got.

Nothing changed, so I think the issue is #2.

It'd be nice to have a command to manually format though just in case.

<!-- TODO Link to commit 435b058 -->

Since `nil_ls` isn't actually a formatter, I'm going to use `nixfmt` which is what I'd want to use anyway.

<!-- TODO Link to commit 87aa75f -->

Nice, when I open up `home/stooj/neovim/plugins/lsp/conform.nix` and save it again, it reformats the code to look nicer.

<!-- TODO Link to commit e0147cf -->

Hmm, this is going to mean some big diffs for the next while, I wonder if I can do the formatting fixes in a single go?

That is a problem for another day.

```bash
cd ~/code/nix/nix-config
git checkout main
git merge vim-2
```

# References

- [echasnovski/mini.nvim: Library of 40+ independent Lua modules improving overall Neovim (version 0.8 and higher) experience with minimal effort](https://github.com/echasnovski/mini.nvim)
- [nvim-telescope/telescope.nvim: Find, Filter, Preview, Pick. All lua, all the time.](https://github.com/nvim-telescope/telescope.nvim)
- [Repeat - Neovim docs](https://neovim.io/doc/user/repeat.html#_single-repeats)
- [BurntSushi/ripgrep: ripgrep recursively searches directories for a regex pattern while respecting your gitignore](https://github.com/BurntSushi/ripgrep)
- [sharkdp/fd: A simple, fast and user-friendly alternative to 'find'](https://github.com/sharkdp/fd)
- [hrsh7th/nvim-cmp: A completion plugin for neovim coded in Lua.](https://github.com/hrsh7th/nvim-cmp)
- [telescope/builtin/__internal.lua#L820](https://github.com/nvim-telescope/telescope.nvim/blob/a4ed82509cecc56df1c7138920a1aeaf246c0ac5/lua/telescope/builtin/__internal.lua#L820)
- [NixOS Search - Options - apropos](https://search.nixos.org/options?channel=24.11&from=0&size=50&sort=relevance&type=packages&query=apropos)
- [How to save last position in files : r/neovim](https://www.reddit.com/r/neovim/comments/1052d98/how_to_save_last_position_in_files/?rdt=57055)
- [lastplace - nixvim docs](https://nix-community.github.io/nixvim/24.11/plugins/lastplace.html)
- [ethanholz/nvim-lastplace: A Lua rewrite of vim-lastplace](https://github.com/ethanholz/nvim-lastplace)
- [plugins.cmp.settings.snippet.expand - nixvim docs](https://nix-community.github.io/nixvim/24.11/plugins/cmp/settings/snippet.html?highlight=plugins.cmp.settings.snippet#pluginscmpsettingssnippetexpand)
- [EditorConfig](https://editorconfig.org/)
- [editorconfig - nixvim docs](https://nix-community.github.io/nixvim/24.11/NeovimOptions/editorconfig/index.html)
- [tpope/vim-sleuth: sleuth.vim: Heuristically set buffer options](https://github.com/tpope/vim-sleuth)
- [vim-sleuth/doc/sleuth.txt at master · tpope/vim-sleuth](https://github.com/tpope/vim-sleuth/blob/master/doc/sleuth.txt)
- [stevearc/conform.nvim: Lightweight yet powerful formatter plugin for Neovim](https://github.com/stevearc/conform.nvim)
- [conform.nvim/doc/recipes.md at master · stevearc/conform.nvim](https://github.com/stevearc/conform.nvim/blob/master/doc/recipes.md#command-to-toggle-format-on-save)
